# 2015 Day 20

## Part 1

We want to find the house with the smallest number $h$ such that $p \ge P$, where $p$ is the number of presents delivered to the house and $P$ is the target number of presents (the puzzle input).

First, we can consider, given a house with number $h$, which elves will deliver presents to that house? The $n$-th elf will deliver to every house which has a number that is an integer multiple of $n$, so the house with number $h$ will be visited by every elf with number $n$ such that $\frac{h}{n} \in \mathbb{Z}$, a.k.a., every $n$ such that $n$ is a factor of $h$.

Then, given the house with number $h$, how many presents $p$ will be delivered to that house? Consider $E$ to be the set of numbers of elves who visit the house. Then, the number of presents delivered to the house with number $h$ is $p = \sum 10 E = 10\sum E$. Earlier, we found that $E$ consists of the factors of $h$, so $p = 10 \sum \text{factors}(h)$.

Now, a naive solution would be to iterate through houses until reaching a house meeting the condition $p \ge P$, knowing $p = 10 \sum \text{factors}(h)$. However, finding the factors of a number is incredibly inefficient for larger and larger numbers, so such a solution would have an insanely large runtime. I waited about a minute before giving up, at which point my loop was checking some $h < 50000$, if I recall correctly, while my puzzle solution would turn out to be $831600$ (and the runtime of the solution I'm working toward was less than $5$ seconds).

Since finding the factors of a number is so inefficient, what if, instead of going through every possible $h$ and computing $10 \sum \text{factors}(h)$, we instead loop through combinations of possible factors, looking for a set of factors $F$ that such $F = \text{factors}(h)$ and $10 \sum F \ge P$?

The difficult part to check there is $F = \text{factors}(h)$. Firstly, not just any $F$ will have a solution $h$. Consider $F = \{2,3,5\}$. Given that $2$, $3$, and $5$ are all factors of $h$, $h$ must be a multiple of $2\cdot3\cdot5=30$. However, $30$ also has the factors $1$, $6$, $10$, $15$, and $30$, which are missing from $F$. So, we need to be checking $F$-s that actually have a solution $h$.

Now, what if instead of just iterating over $F$-s, we iterate over $A$-s, where $A \subset F$ such that $F$ can be determined from $A$? For those not acquainted with these symbols, I'm saying, what if we check $A$-s where $A$ is a set of numbers that are only *some* of our factors. Then, $F$ contains the rest of the factors, and if we choose the right $A$-s, there will be a solution $F = \text{factors}(h)$. Since $F$ is determinable via $A$, lets say by some function $f$ such that $f(A) = H$, we now are looking for $A$-s such that $f(A) = \text{factors}(h)$. Furthermore, $p = 10 \sum F = 10 \sum f(A)$ (remember this when we start coding).

So, what are the $A$-s that we should check, and what is $f$? For each $A$, $F$ must be determinable, so $A$ is a set of factors from which the rest of the factors can be determined. So, think, for some number $h$ with factors $F$, how could we choose a limited number of those factors $A$ such that, without knowing the original number, we could determine $F$? First, consider that, if we know $F$, we actually must know $h$ as well. $h$ is the largest factor of $h$, so the largest number in $F$ is $h$. So, we must choose an $A$ such that we can determine $h$ from $A$, and since we are iteratively checking different $A$-s, we don't want any two $A$-s to have the same $h$, because then we're wasting computation power. So, for any $h$, what is a combination of its factors $A$ such that no other number has the same $F$? $A$ is the prime factors of $h$! [According to Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclid%27s_theorem), this was also the basis of a proof by Euler of Euclid's theorem, as a consequence of the [fundamental theorem of arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_theorem_of_arithmetic). Pretty cool.

So, here's where we are now: we want to iterate over every prime factorization $A$, looking for $A$ such that there is an $h$ satisfying $f(A) = \text{factors}(h)$ where there is no other set $A'$ such that $h' > h$.

How would we go about this? Note that, since I'm working in Python, from now on, I'm going to be referencing its data types, syntax, etc.. All of the following variable names are equivalent to the mathematical variables we've been discussing, and I'll be using them interchangeably:
* `prime_factors` is $A$.
* `get_factors(prime_factors)` is $F$.
    * `get_factors` is $f$.
    * `prod(X)` is a function that returns the product of `X`. I implemented it [here](https://github.com/glistermelon/advent-of-code/blob/master/util/python/util.py).
* `target_presents` is $P$.
* `s` is $\sum F$.

Let's create a Python function, `solve(prime_factors)`. `prime_factors` is $A$ from before. `solve`, given a list of some prime factors `prime_factors`, adds a new factor to `prime_factors` and calls itself recursively until $\sum f(A) \ge P$. Then, it takes the $h$ determinable from $A$ and stores it in `lowest_h`. Each recursive call to `solve` will try adding different prime factors to `prime_factors`, stopping when any $n$ that could be determined from `prime_factors` would be greater than `lowest_h`. The code looks like this:

```py
target_presents = math.ceil(target_presents / 10) # Clarification 1
lowest_h = target_presents # Clarification 2

def solve(prime_factors):

    global lowest_h
    global target_presents
    f = prime_factors[-1] if prime_factors else 2 # Clarification 3

    while True:

        p = prod(prime_factors) * f if prime_factors else f
        if p >= lowest_h: break # Clarification 4
        prime_factors.append(f)
        s = sum(get_factors(prime_factors))
        if s >= target_presents:
            lowest_h = p # Clarification 4
            prime_factors.pop()
            break
        else:
            solve(prime_factors)
            prime_factors.pop()
        
        f += 1
        while not is_prime(f): # Clarification 5
            f += 1
```

Here are the clarifications, per the comments:
1. We divide $P$ by $10$ because $p \ge P \Longrightarrow 10 \sum \text{factors}(h) \ge P \Longrightarrow \frac{p}{10} \ge \sum \text{factors}(h)$.
2. If $h$ exists, $h < P$, because $h = P$ would be a trivial solution the problem, since $\sum \text{factors}(P) > P$.
3. If this is the top-most call to `solve`, then no factors have been provided yet, so we start with the smallest prime number, $2$. If factors have been provided, we start with the last provided prime. This means that in every call to `solve`, the factors in `prime_factors` are ascending. We don't want to test something like `[2, 3, 2]` when `[2, 2, 3]` should have already been tested.
4. *Note that `p` is NOT that same* $p$ *from the math. `p` is for "product," and* $p$ *is for "presents."* We're building the prime factorization of the number we're looking for, $h$, so `p` is a factor of $h$. If `p` $\ge P$, then we can stop recursion, as `p` is a solution for $h$, and will be lower than any other solution $h'$ with the prime factorization of $h$ with another prime added.
5. Remember, we're checking prime factorizations, so only prime numbers are welcome. I defined `is_prime` as simply returning `sympy.isprime`, and I decorated `is_prime` with `functools.cache`.

Now, we must define `get_factors`. Consider any $n$ with prime factorization $A$ which has divisor $d$. $\frac{n}{d}$ has prime factorization $A_0 \subset A$, so $d$ is the product of some of the prime factors of $n$. Therefore, for any number, all of its divisors are combinations of its prime factors, so we can define `get_factors` without using any division, as division is very computationally inefficient:

```py
def get_factors(ns : list[int]):
    yield 1
    done = set()
    for r in range(1, len(ns) + 1):
        for c in itertools.combinations(ns, r):
            p = prod(c)
            if p not in done:
                done.add(p)
                yield p
```

And, we're done. My puzzle input was $36\,000\,000$, and `solve([])` yielded the correct solution, $831\,600$, in `lowest_h` after $18$ seconds of runtime.

But it can be optimized further!

Firstly, in every recursive call, we append a number to `prime_factors` and compute the new product of `prime_factors`. Instead of multiplying the entire list every time, we can track the product with each recursive call. If we add a number to the list, we just have to multiply the tracked product by the number to get the new product of the list. The optimization is minimal here (just 2 deciseconds for me), but I couldn't just ignore nonoptimality.

Another small optimization that can be made is removing the while loop that finds the next prime factor `f`, replacing it with a `next_factor` function decorated by `functools.cache`. If you try implementing this yourself, don't forget to cache `is_prime` and `next_factor` or your runtime will be much longer!

Now, for a major optimization. Every time we add a factor to to the list, we call `get_factors` to recalculate the sum of the factors; mathematically, every time we append a number $a$ to $A$, we recalculate $\sum F= \sum f(A)$. However, if we keep track of the sum with each $a$ added, we can actually use simple math to find new sums.

There are two possibilities for $a$ (the number we're appending to $A$).

First, $a \not\in A$ yet. Appending $a$ transforms $F_0$ to $F_1$. Calculating the new sum is trivial. We know that every factor in $F_0$ does not contain $a$ in its prime factorization, so for every factor $d \in F_0$, $F_1$ will contain $d$ and $da$. So, the new sum of factors will be $(a + 1)\sum F_0$.

Now, the more complicated scenario is if $a \in A$ already. Say $a$ already appears in $A$ in $n_a$ times. Then, $F_1$ will contain $da$ for every $d$ in $F_0$ that has fewer than $n_a$ occurrences of $a$ in its prime factorization. Since we should be keeping track of the sums for each $A$, the new sum of factors will be $a^{n_a + 1}\sum f(A_{-n_a}) + \sum F_0$.

With these new optimizations, the code looks like this:

```py
target_presents = math.ceil(target_presents / 10)
lowest_h = target_presents

def solve(prime_factors : list[int], products : list[int], sums : list[int]):

    global target_presents
    global lowest_h

    f = prime_factors[-1] if prime_factors else 2

    while True:

        p = f
        if products: p *= products[-1]
        if p >= lowest_h: break
        products.append(p)

        s = None
        if prime_factors and f == prime_factors[-1]:
            prime_factors.append(f)
            i = prime_factors.index(f) - 1
            s = f**(prime_factors.count(f))
            if i >= 0: s *= sums[i]
            s += sums[-1]
        else:
            prime_factors.append(f)
            s = f + 1
            if sums:
                s *= sums[-1]
        sums.append(s)

        end_recursion = s >= target_presents
        if end_recursion:
            lowest_h = p
        else:
            solve(prime_factors, products, sums)

        prime_factors.pop()
        products.pop()
        sums.pop()
        
        if end_recursion:
            break

        f = next_prime(f)
```

Not a single call to get_factors is necessary! This brings runtime down to less than $1$ second!

## Part 2

For part 2, the elves only deliver presents to $50$ houses each, and they deliver $11$ presents per house instead of $10$. This can be solved with two simple changes to the unoptimized code for Part 1.

First, replace the initial division by $10$ with division by $11$:
```py
target_presents = math.ceil(target_presents / 11)
```

Now, look at this line:
```py
s = sum(get_factors(prime_factors))
```

Instead of considering every factor, we only want to consider factors representing elves that would actually visit our house. Each elf with number $n$ will visit a house with number $h$ as long as there exists an integer $k \le 50$ such that $nk = h$; in other words, $\frac{h}{n} \le 50$. So simply replace that line with this:
```py
s = sum(f for f in get_factors(prime_factors) if p // f <= 50)
```

It ain't great, with a whopping $18$ - $19$ second runtime on my end, but it works.

## Concluding Statement

This was a fun problem! Anyway, I don't expect anyone to actually read this, but if anyone *does* read this and has questions about it, you can contact me or post a github issue or something.

My complete implementation of the solution for both parts can be found [here](https://github.com/glistermelon/advent-of-code/blob/master/2015/python/20.py).
